[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Archetypal astrology is a
branch of Western astrology.
And I've actually started
referring to astrologies.
There's such a
diversity of astrologers
from around the world,
and archetypal astrology
is particularly grounded in this
understanding of archetypes.
So every planet is associated
with a particular archetype,
quality, or character that
has this spectrum of meaning.
This multivalence of meaning, or
this multifaceted range of ways
that it can come through when
embodied in an individual life
or in a human
event, and so forth.
And what perhaps differentiates
archetypal astrology
from other forms of
astrology is really
this focus on the archetypes
and its grounding in the depth
psychological tradition,
in archetypal psychology,
and also this philosophical
lineage of understanding
what an archetype even is.
So within archetypal astrology,
the meaning of an archetype
is defined by the idea
of Platonic archetypes
or Platonic forms, as
Plato described them
in his dialogues, or
Aristotelian universals.
Aristotle described
the universals
that are inherent
to the particulars.
They're like Whiteheadian,
Alfred North Whitehead.
His eternal form-- or
what are they called?
Alfred North Whitehead's
eternal objects
that ingress into
existence, into experience,
and then they're like mythic
deities of the pantheons,
of the mythic traditions
from around the world.
They're also like the
psychological archetypes
that Carl Jung described.
So when we approach
an understanding
of the astrological system
and what an archetype is,
all of these different
philosophical
and spiritual and
psychological perspectives
are brought to bear
on interpreting
what the archetype
is and understanding
how it works in a
participatory relationship
with the human psyche.
So a Platonic form or
idea is the universal
that we see in the particular.
So an example that Plato brings
forward is that of horse.
Think horse with a
capital H. And when
we see particular
horses, we recognize
that what is in common,
what is universal behind
them is this archetype or
form of horse or horseness.
And for Plato, at
least, these forms
all existed in an ideal
realm, the realm of forms.
And that ideal realm
was, in some sense,
separate from the
flawed, mundane realm
that we all live in.
But there's a
participatory relationship
between the particular horses
and the universal form of horse
that they are participating in.
Morphic fields are
another excellent way
of describing what
an archetype is,
and even the way that,
with a morphic field when
we participate in
that, it inflects,
it shapes how future
participants in that field
will inhabit that.
And so morphic fields
are a great example,
because you can see the
evolution through time,
and yet there's still
this kind of core to it.
And so from the archetypal
astrological perspective,
it's like a blend of the
Platonic ideal, which
is eternal and unchanging,
and the morphic field,
which is evolving through time.
And an archetype, in terms of
the astrological perspective,
it holds both.
It's both eternal and evolving,
and it's evolving through us,
and yet, it's echoing back to
this eternal archetype that
lies behind it.
So it holds both in this
paradox of the eternal
and the evolving.
So Aristotle differed from
Plato in his understanding.
Instead of thinking that
the forms or the archetypes
were in their own ideal
separate realm, Aristotle,
he saw them as universals that
were only part of this realm.
So we can conceptually
understand
that the universal,
of course, lies behind
all the particular
horses we see,
but there isn't a ideal form
that's in a separate realm
as Plato saw it.
So when we see that
extraordinary painting
of the School of Athens
that has Plato and Aristotle
at the center and
Plato's pointing upward
and Aristotle's pointing out.
And you can see in there the
difference of their gestures
that Plato is pointing
toward a transcendent realm,
an ideal realm, and
Aristotle is pointing out
to the world around him.
And those are the
two places where
the universals or the forms,
the archetypes, exist.
And the archetypal astrological
perspective, I think,
also aims to hold both
of those together,
recognizing the truth in both.
So we can look back
through history,
and we can see when two or more
planets come into alignment
with each other.
These are called
transits or aspects,
and the alignments are--
they're geometrical.
So you can have a
conjunction, where you have
two or more planets together.
So if you were to look up
into the sky with a telescope
or without, you would see these
two planets next to each other.
You have the
opposition, which is--
it's like the full
moon position.
The conjunction is
the new moon position,
the opposition is the
full moon position,
and then you have part of
the same quadrature cycle.
What's called the square,
so a 90-degree Angle
That's your half moon.
And these relationships, these
geometrical relationships
are formed between
all the planets.
And we can look
back through history
and see when these alignments
were coming into orb, into what
we call the orb of
influence and see
how the archetypal
qualities associated
with each one of
those planets combine.
They inflect each other,
they influence each other
and how those then live
through human events
in this sequential patterning
throughout history.
So an example is the
Uranus Pluto cycle.
And the archetype of Uranus
is associated with rebellion,
with change, with disruption.
It's the trickster.
It's the Promethean archetype of
stealing fire from the heavens
and granting it as
new consciousness,
as new awareness to humanity.
It's that sudden spark
of insight or awakening
or liberation.
And then Pluto, the
archetype of Pluto,
is associated with the
depths with the underworld
with the chthonic, the demonic,
the terrifying, the corrupt.
But it's also related to
the death, rebirth mystery.
The Phoenix rising
from the ashes
or the process of composting.
It's like Kali in the Hindu
tradition of destruction
and then creation, or Pele in
the Hawaiian of the volcanic
dying and being reborn.
So when you bring
those two together,
these are potent
powerful archetypes,
and what one would imagine just
bringing those two archetypes
into combination would be some
kind of awakening or liberation
or unleashing of what's been
kept in the underworld of what
is waiting to be reborn
out of what has been dying.
And sure enough, every
time these two planets
come into alignment
into what we call
hard aspect, that conjunction,
the opposition or the square,
we see it correlate with
major periods of change.
Social upheaval, revolution,
and that Uranian archetype,
it liberates, it awakens
the Platonic elements
of maybe those
who've been oppressed
or that which has
been repressed.
And so, for example,
there was an opposition
of Uranus and Pluto in
the late 18th century that
correlated with the French
Revolution and the Haitian
Revolution.
And you can see is themes
that come up of revolution
and liberating the oppressed
patterned through history,
and particular strains
around women's liberation
or civil rights or
sexual revolution
or the psychedelic
revolution in the 1960s.
So the 1960s was one of
our most recent alignments
of Uranus and Pluto.
Uranus and Pluto came into a
conjunction from 1960 to 1972,
and we see here the same
revolutionary themes
of feminism and the women's
movement, Black liberation
and the Civil Rights movement.
We see the psychedelic
renaissance.
revolution.
We see the beginning of
the gay rights movement.
We see the birth of the
ecological movement,
with the publication of
Rachel Carson's "Silent
Spring" in 1962.
And then after that
alignment comes to an end,
after Uranus and Pluto are no
longer in that conjunction,
which closed in 1972, in
some ways, those themes,
they go underground
a bit or they
take different tacks and other
alignments come in and that
influences the
zeitgeist, the flavor
of what's happening
in the collective.
And then the very next time
Uranus and Pluto come back
into alignment
together has actually
been in the last decade.
So beginning in 2007 and it
will be lasting until 2020.
So we're in the
sunset years right now
of the Uranus Pluto square.
So it went from the
conjunction, the 1960s,
over to the 90-degree
angle of the square.
And sure enough, we're seeing
the first Black president
carrying forward the themes
of the Civil Rights movement.
We see Black Lives Matter.
Barack Obama is
actually a great example
of this diachronic
patterning, because he
was born in 1962 with the
Uranus Pluto conjunction.
He is elected president
of the United States
in 2008, just as
the Uranus Pluto
square is coming into orb, and
his presidency, in many ways,
defines the first eight
years of that alignment.
Likewise, we see the themes
around gay marriage becoming
legalized in the
United States or all
of the awareness around
gender and transgender rights
and gender fluidity how the
conversation is changing
and so rapidly around that.
You see that
acceleration of change
when Uranus and
Pluto come together.
It's this unleashing
of these Titanic forces
that affect such
profound change.
So another theme associated
with Uranus Pluto
can be that Uranian
awakening or liberating
of the Platonic
shadow, the corrupt.
And so we see the empowerment
of individualistic demagogues,
for example.
Mao in the '60s.
We see Putin and Trump and Kim
Jong-un in this current era.
So you see this Uranian and
unpredictable quality embodied
in these individuals
and they're empowered.
Pluto relates to
empowerment for good or ill,
and so it's so
interesting to see
how the first part of
the Uranus square Pluto
was defined by Barack
Obama's presidency
and then how there was
this possibility of either
a woman, Hillary Clinton, which
carries another Uranus Pluto
theme of the women's
movement and feminism.
The possibility of her
being elected in contrast
to basically a symbol of the
complete opposite of what
she, of what Barack
Obama represented.
And how you can see
the challenging--
I guess I'm being biased here.
But you can see these
very different energies
that are also carried by
the Uranus Pluto alignment.
And revolutions, on the one
hand, they can be liberating,
they can bring in
new energy, they
can bring in positive
change, but they can also
be extraordinarily violent.
They can be demoralizing,
and bring about change that
can feel for the worse as well.
It's interesting to compare
our current Uranus Pluto
square to the last Uranus
Pluto square, which
happened in the 1930s.
So this was in alignment
all through the decade
of the 1930s.
It came in with the
Great Depression.
Interestingly,
there was a t-square
of Saturn, Uranus, and Pluto.
So those Uranus Pluto energies
were unleashing the Saturn.
Saturn brings in the principle
of constraint, of constriction,
of things falling, of
things going wrong,
of the contraction and crisis.
And that t-square of
Saturn, Uranus, and Pluto
correlated with the
Great Depression.
Interestingly, the next time
that those three planets
were in that t-square
configuration of an opposition
and two squares was from 2008
to 2011, correlating exactly
with the Great Recession.
So we see this kind of
crisis and break down
that then opens up to
a period of revolution
and change and social upheaval.
So if we look at the
1930s, that Uranus Pluto
square of the 1930s, here,
we see the rise of Hitler
and the empowerment of
a demagogue in that era.
And then here in the next
square between Uranus and Pluto,
we again see multiple
figures around the world
that are carrying this
same kind of empowering
of the individual leaning
toward dictatorship that is
reflective of that earlier era.
This Uranus Pluto square is
coming to a close and by 2020,
and what has started
to come into orb
is a Saturn Pluto conjunction.
And Saturn Pluto is
very different energy
than Uranus Pluto.
Instead of Uranus liberating,
awakening, opening up,
accelerating the
Platonic, Saturn
brings contraction,
constriction, crisis.
It brings the reality
principle, and this
started coming into orbit
in late 2017 already.
So this is our first
year of being in it.
The Saturn Pluto
conjunction will
be tightest in 2019 and 2020.
And that, if we look back
again just at the 20th century
when Saturn and Pluto
came into alignment,
we do see it correlated
with periods of major crisis
and contraction and challenge,
difficulty at a social level.
So the First World War
began under a Saturn Pluto
conjunction.
The Second World
War, which happened
at the end of starting in
1939, at the end of that year
honest Pluto square
just like we have now,
the Second World War began 1939
under a Saturn Pluto square.
The Vietnam War began under
a Saturn Pluto opposition
in the mid 1960s.
9/11 happened under a
Saturn Pluto opposition
at the beginning
of this century.
So there's a very heavy,
challenging quality
that's associated with the
Saturn Pluto combination.
However, there are other
alignments of Saturn and Pluto
that haven't correlated
with a World War.
For example, the last
conjunction, the conjunction
before the one that
we're currently in,
that was at the
beginning of the 1980s.
The 1980 to 1984 was tightest
in '81 and '82, and that Saturn
Pluto conjunction, many
astrologers actually
thought there might be a third
World War that started then,
and it didn't happen.
And part of that is consciously
working with these energies
in ways that can redirect them.
And you also see,
not necessarily
coming through in national
or international conflict,
but other forms such as
maybe economic crisis
or empowerment of
conservative ideals,
and so forth, that
can come with that.
But what can also be
forged in Saturn Pluto
periods is a capacity
to face the shadow,
to face the sides of humanity
that we don't want to own.
That we tend to
split off and other,
and that's why they're
so often conflicts,
a creation of an enemy or
another under Saturn Pluto
periods.
Near the end of
his life, Carl Jung
was asked, what
would need to happen
for us to avoid some
kind of a nuclear war,
and his response was that the
extent to which each individual
can own the shadow
within themselves,
can recognize, as he
says in his red book,
that the line of good and evil
runs through your own heart.
The more each individual
can come to recognize that
within each of us
and the less we
split off that and
project it onto others,
that is the degree to which
we are less likely to enter
into some kind of
conflict, some kind of war
at an international scale.
So archetypal astrology can be
used as an interpretive tool,
as a means to understand
the kinds of experiences
that we have, whether
in everyday life or most
potently in
spiritual emergencies
or in non-ordinary
states of consciousness,
psychedelic experiences,
work with holotropic
breathwork, work with
active imagination, even.
And the reason it is such a
profound tool and practice
for this is because, often,
those experiences, they're
chaotic, they can be confusing.
They're larger than life,
and having a grounding
and an understanding of
the planetary archetypes
can, first of all,
give us language
to parse out what
we have experienced
and to recognize
the archetypes lying
at the back of
those experiences.
So when in, perhaps a very
challenging psychedelic state,
perhaps one is experiencing
oneself dying on a battlefield.
It feels like the end of
World War I and we experience
ourselves in the
mud and the muck
with the wounds and the
groans of the dying,
and maybe it's in the rain.
Some kind of very potent
experience like that.
And then if one, for
example, knows the transits,
sometimes, this can be helpful
within the session itself,
but often, it's most
helpful afterward
when reviewing the session, then
you can come to the recognition
that, oh, there's a Saturn
Neptune alignment in the sky
right now, and Saturn
Neptune correlates
with these feelings of
being drowning in the mud,
being at the end of one's life.
Being separated from the
divine or some greater
sense of cosmic meaning.
And Neptune, the
archetype of Neptune,
it relates to the transcendent,
the spiritual, the numinous.
It symbolizes water.
It merges with whatever
it's in relationship to,
and Saturn, it's this principle
of death, of mortality,
of endings, of loss, and when
you bring those two together,
one of the ways it
can come through
is this kind of
existential experience
of loss, of dying, of being
separated from the divine.
And just to go back to that
example of perhaps experiencing
in a psychedelic
session, being in the mud
at the end of World
War I and dying
alongside your fellow
soldiers, well, there
was a Saturn Neptune alignment
in the sky when World
War I ended.
And this particular
example I'm giving
is actually a personal
example, and there
was a Saturn Neptune
square in the sky
at the time this happened.
So having that context--
that interpretive context--
can help take oneself out
of the individual personal
meaning of the session.
The personal elements can be so
important, can be so helpful,
and it also can give
us a perspective
of the transpersonal,
of the archetypal,
and see how these archetypes,
these gods, as James
Hillman would say,
are living through us
and are living into our
experience with the session.
Psychedelic experiences,
or non-ordinary states
of consciousness
too, they tap us
into that archetypal level
of reality in a much more
direct and potent way.
So it's as though we
have crossed a threshold.
We've crossed a veil into
the realm of archetypes.
Into the realm of the gods.
And having the
tools of astrology
to correlate the
positions of the planets
at the moment one is
having that experience,
also to understand our own birth
charts, our own natal charts
to see, oh, that's why
I personally am having
this kind of experience
and someone else
might be having a
totally different kind
of experience on the same day.
You're sharing the
transits in common,
but you have totally
different birth charts
that you're bringing to it.
So it can help
bring that greater
context and correlation.
I also find that the practice
of archetypal astrology and work
with psychedelics and
non--ordinary states
of consciousness are
mutually enhancing,
mutually informing
of each other.
Because working with
astrology can help one
find an interpretation,
a context,
and a larger sense of meaning
to our personal psychedelic
experiences.
Likewise, going into
those non-ordinary states
can teach us about
those archetypes, which
then expands our knowledge of
how archetypal astrology works
and operates.
And you can see parts of the
archetypes, how they manifest
that you might not
have read about
in just studying astrology
through a textbook
or from a teacher.
But it's this direct
experience of the archetypal.
When we go into these kind of
transpersonal or collective
experiences and we recognize
the archetypal core behind it,
we can then look through
history at each time
those two or more
planets correlated
with those archetypes
came into alignment,
we can see this
diachronic patterning
that makes sense of our
experience right now.
And in a way, yes, it
both does and doesn't
matter that maybe it's our own
personal past life experience
or maybe we're just having
an experience on behalf
of the collective so
that isn't forgotten.
So that those moments that may
be so tragic or so joyful, so
ecstatic that reside in
the collective, maybe
reside in the
collective unconscious,
they live, again, through us
in these non ordinary states.
And again, the
practice of working
with the transits,
of understanding them
through an astrological
lens can provide a map
to see each one of
those experiences
through history and then
how it comes to bear
on our own personal experience.
Well, one of the
important things
about archetypal astrology that
archetypal astrologers tend
to emphasize-- and this is a
metaphor that's put forward
both by Rick Tarnas
and by Stan Grof
is that the positions
of the planets
are like the hands of a clock.
And so when a clock
says that it's noon,
that it's 12 o'clock,
the clock itself
isn't causing it to be noon.
It's correlated with it.
It is indicating the time.
Likewise, the positions
of the planets
are indicating the quality
of time of that moment.
And so it's important to keep
in mind the causality here.
That it's not the
physical planets
that are causing these
events to unfold.
It's rather the positions of
the planets and the human events
unfolding and the archetypal
thread that connects the two.
They are a synchronicity.
They are synchronicity
between inner human events
or collective human events and
the positions of the planets,
the largest movement
in our solar system.
And they can be correlated
with the innermost private
experiences we have or our
relational experiences,
our community experiences,
or world events.
Politically, spiritually,
ecologically, even,
and so you can see
these correlations
at so many levels playing
out upon the Earth,
upon this remarkable
life-giving planet that
seems to be, as Rick
Tarnas calls it,
a moving center of meaning.
That it's a moving center
of meaning in relation
to the movements of all the
other planets and something
perhaps that's
even beyond those.